---
layout: post
title: Ideas
date: 2020-05-20
comments: true
external-url:
categories: Info
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD004 MD009 MD014 MD024 MD040 -->

Ideas are hard. 

I won't even try to sugar-coat around this fact. It is easier to work in an existing framework, here are guidelines, here are the grade ruberics, here are the deadlines. Structure is nice. This summer thing isn't completely structured, but isn't fully unstructured either. It's more of a training wheels approach.

Every time you do this, it gets easier. It is overwhelming at first but each time a little less so. After a while the unease tranforms into nervous excitement, and the overwhelming feeling turns into an idea machine for all the possibilities out there. The feelings don't totally go away, but they transform into more productive forces. It becomes fun.

That's why we're drilling this cycle eight times. You'll grow to realize it's not that bad and quite fun actually. This guide in general could be work bookmarking to revisit now and then. Here is some general advice.

## Make something useful for you first

A lot of people start out with the idea they want to make something that targets every person in X country or all college students in general. That's a fine end goal, but not a good start goal. The issue is that starting with too broad of an audience can make it tricky to figure out how to make everyone happy. You also end up starting with a huge feature set of things that just make it very daunting to get a version 1.0 out. Honestly this is why I see the majority of side projects and startups fail. It either ends up being incomplete or something that no one really _wants_.

I think the best way is to make something for yourself first. This is a much easier problem. You know your needs the best, and you have a good idea of what has worked for you before. Users are generally hard to survey and interview, but when it's just yourself it's really easy to collect feedback for yourself. 

Once you have something you're happy with, expand slowly (ignoring the instinct to grow quickly). At this point you're further along than about 95% of projects out there. Now try adjusting your software to include: (roughly in this order, but one at a time)

* your friends
* your family
* your classmates 
* your coworkers 
* your city/community  

This kind of growth is organic and a very reliable path to making something lots of people want. You'll realize that you'll pivot and rework a lot. It's perfectly acceptable to just stop at something that maybe only your university finds useful. Or it's fine if you're the only person happy with it. Focus on making people happy one at a time starting with yourself and you'll find it leads you to good results.

## This Annoys Me Or Someone I Know

One way I see a lot of successful projects start out is picking something that annoyed you or someone close to you. As software people, we have the power to streamline the world to make it nicer and less stressful. Many things are broken by design, while others are broken by a lack of care. These annoyances can be a starting point of something useful. 

These can be in many forms:

* the interface is ugly - make a prettier one or a new form of access
* it is not accessible to a large variety of people (disability, language, slow internet). Check out [a11y.coffee](https://a11y.coffee/) - add accessibility improvements or make a new accesible interface
* it takes too many steps to do the task you want - create something more streamlined
* you have to use many different pieces of software to do a task - figure out how to create a combined workflow
* it does not spark joy 

## What If I Did X

Another way I've seen a lot of good projects born is when someone said, "What if I did X?", and then made it happen. There is something about procrastination that drives creativity in some side task that leads to interesting side projects. Sometimes your project isn't really solving a problem, but just something you want to see could work. It might fail, it might succeed. 

You'll learn a thing or two, and it will pave the path towards things in your future you can't possibly imagine. Hindsight might make it feel like some type of destinity, but in reality you were just messing about and wondered why things happen. 

## Someone Already Did It

Most of the time, your idea is already taken. A few times it's not, it is close to impossible to do. There are still lots of ideas that don't fall into either but it takes time (and this is totally natural). Over time you'll find good sources of inspiration that leads to fresher ideas. Today, CS is at a point where it's rapidly expanding into almost every facet of soceity and knowledge. Many places didn't have much CS traditionally and now it's open season with many low hanging fruit. Many successful startups and research projects today are born out of this combination of CS with X (guess why UIUC has so many CS+X degrees all of a sudden).

Even if what you want to do is *already done*, **that's perfectly okay**. Not everything you have to do has to be totally original and it's pretty fun redoing things that already exist out there. As long as you're not copying their entire code, I think this is a really valuable learning experience and many of my initial projects were like that. In industry, there is a concept of system design interviews where they often ask how you'd engineer a feature that often already exists out there and this experience definitely helps.

## Gimmicks and Flashy Features

Sometimes it's elitism and sometimes it's someone's own defeatist attidude, but do not undervalue a "gimmick" or "flashy" component. Many times people tend to dismiss good UI/UX, interesting features, good art, or a novel type of computer interaction as a gimmick. Sometimes these can make or break a project. Sometimes they don't really add on to a project but make it more fun.

Sometimes users are more likely to use your software just because of what you think is a "gimmick". I think side projects with more of a gimmick/flashy factor are always more fun to both make and look at.

## Note Every Idea

At first ideas will be hard to come by, but after a while you'll start generating lots of ideas. Most will be bad, practically impossible, or already done but are still a useful part of the process. Don't discard any of them, even if they seem kind of cringe. Many billion dollar companies today were once a bad idea that people did not think would work.

*Aggresively* note down all your ideas in places where you can search them at a later date. I like Google Keep, but honestly there are dozens of different note software. Your ideas are probably better than you realize and worth keeping. Doing this

* saves your time since you might come up with the same idea again, giving you a better starting point
* makes you think harder about what your idea is over a castle in the sky that is nowhere as well defined as you think it is
* keeps you from forgetting - trust me, you will _forget_ and it will often only take 2-3 minutes

(If you're smart you can turn 8 of your unused ideas into a summer series of workshops.)

## Startups and Research

Maybe your project starts going in really interesting directions. That's awesome!

* for startups check out [Illinois Founders](http://founders.illinois.edu/), they can guide you much better than we can 

* if you think your project has research potential, create a writeup + picture/video demo and start showing it to grad students and professors. 

## Good Advice From Others

These are extremely good articles, and ones that inspired me a lot.

* [A Software Developer’s Guide to Side Projects](https://simpleprogrammer.com/guide-side-projects/) - Simple Programmer. He's written a whole book of advice as well.

* [How to Get Startup Ideas](http://paulgraham.com/startupideas.html) and [Do Things that Don't Scale](http://paulgraham.com/ds.html) - [Paul Graham](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Graham_(programmer)). He's written a lot of similar blog posts that I constantly reread now and then.

* [Software engineer, it's okay to not have a side project](https://benoitpasquier.com/2019/10/software-engineer-its-okay-to-not-have-a-side-project/) - Benoit Pasquier. I think this article gives a good understanding of the toxic side project culture. If you feel things are becoming a source of anxiety or feel like a chore, step away. Trust your instincts.
